W-20405422-a4d-overview-fa (#536)
mulesoft/docs-code-builder: modules/ROOT/pages/api-ai-design-spec.adoc

= MuleSoft Dev Agent Overview

MuleSoft Dev Agent is a purpose-built assistant for the development lifecycle, available directly in Anypoint Code Builder.

> MuleSoft Dev Agent enables you to build, deploy, and manage your projects using natural language prompts.

Reviewer: Should you use the full name, 'MuleSoft Dev Agent,' on first reference, and then use the shortened form, 'Dev Agent,' for all subsequent mentions? Or, should it always be referenced by the full name?

Dev Agent integrates with the xref:mulesoft-mcp-server::index.adoc[MuleSoft MCP Server], which provides a set of agentic tools that connect Dev Agent directly to your MuleSoft environment. Through this integration, Dev Agent can perform actions and retrieve data on your behalf, enabling capabilities such as:

* Developing API specifications
* Creating and configuring applications
* Creating agent networks
* Searching for assets
* Deploying and managing instances
* Securing your applications

These features are powered by large language models (LLMs) that operate within the Salesforce Shared Trust Boundary.

MuleSoft Dev Agent is part of the broader MuleSoft AI ecosystem, which also includes capabilities such as Map with AI and Map and Transform with AI. For an overview of all MuleSoft AI features, see the xref:general:learning-map-mulesoft-ai.adoc[Learning Map: MuleSoft AI].

NOTE: MuleSoft Dev Agent is available on US, EU, Canada, and Japan cloud hosts.

== Before You Begin

> Before you start using MuleSoft Dev Agent, ensure that you meet the following prerequisites:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before using MuleSoft Dev Agent, make sure that you meet these prerequisites:
```

* Set up and access the web or desktop IDE.
* Make sure you have the required Anypoint Code Builder permissions.

> * Ensure you have the following permissions to use MuleSoft Dev Agent:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Make sure you have the Mule Developer Generative AI User permission to use MuleSoft Dev Agent.
```

> ** Mule Developer Generative AI User

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> * Make sure Einstein is enabled in Access Management. For more information, see Enabling Einstein for Anypoint Platform.

Reviewer: add the link to Enabling Einstein for Anypoint Platform

> NOTE: Authentication happens through the user logged into Anypoint Code Builder. MuleSoft Dev Agent inherits the same permissions as that user and can only execute actions that the user is authorized to perform in Anypoint Platform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: Authentication happens through the user logged in to Anypoint Code Builder. MuleSoft Dev Agent inherits the same permissions as that user and can only execute actions that the user is authorized to perform in Anypoint Platform.
```

== Use MuleSoft Dev Agent

> You can open MuleSoft Dev Agent from:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can open MuleSoft Dev Agent from the:
```

> * The toolbar icon

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Toolbar icon
```

> * The top navigation bar

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Top navigation bar
```

> * The *Build with AI* card in the project canvas

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Build with AI* card in the project canvas
```

When you submit a prompt, MuleSoft Dev Agent processes it using the MuleSoft MCP Server and performs actions such as generating API specifications or integration flows.

Depending on your configuration, MuleSoft Dev Agent can:

* Request approval before writing to your files
* Write automatically if *Auto-approve* is enabled in settings

=== Plan and Act Modes

MuleSoft Dev Agent operates in two modes:

* *Plan Mode*  
Dev Agent analyzes your prompt and produces a step-by-step plan describing how it will accomplish the task. No actions are executed automatically in this mode.

* *Act Mode*  

> Dev Agent attempts to perform the actions outlined in the plan, using the MuleSoft MCP Server tools to modify files, create resources, or execute changes in your project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dev Agent attempts to perform the actions outlined in the plan by using the MuleSoft MCP Server tools to modify files, create resources, or execute changes to your project.
```

You can switch between modes depending on whether you prefer to review the plan before execution or allow Dev Agent to act directly.

=== How Dev Agent Generates Code

MuleSoft Dev Agent uses MuleSoft-optimized AI pipelines to generate high-quality code for API specifications and integration flows.

> These pipelines are exposed to Dev Agent through the following MCP tools:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The pipelines are exposed to Dev Agent through these MCP tools:
```

** *Restore Task Only* – Restores only the task history associated with the checkpoint.
** *Restore Files and Tasks* – Restores both the file changes and the task history.

* *Compare* – Compare the current state of your workspace to the selected checkpoint.  
This opens a comparison view that highlights the differences between your current files and the files at the time the checkpoint was created.

== Add Workflows and Rules

Rules and Workflows allow developers to customize how MuleSoft Dev Agent operates within their project.

Rules Define natural-language constraints or guidelines for how Dev Agent should generate content.  
You can use rules to enforce naming conventions, ensure consistent error handling, or maintain coding standards across your workspace.  
Rules can be defined at two levels:  
* *Global* – Applies to all prompts sent to Dev Agent.  
* *Workspace* – Applies only to the active workspace.

Workflows create predefined multi-step tasks that Dev Agent executes automatically.  
Workflows let you streamline repeated development steps and can be triggered using slash commands (for example, `/workflow-name`) in the Dev Agent panel.

> === Add rules or workflows

Reviewer: Maybe make this heading more differentiated from the previous heading?

. Open MuleSoft Dev Agent in the sidebar.
. Select *Settings*.
. In the *Rules and Workflows* section, choose whether you want to add a rule or a workflow.
. Select *Add Rule* or *Add Workflow*.
. Provide the required information:

> * For rules: Enter the natural-language instruction you want Dev Agent to follow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* For rules, enter the natural-language instruction you want Dev Agent to follow.
```

> * For workflows: Enter a name, an optional description, and the steps the workflow should run.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* For workflows, enter a name, an optional description, and the steps the workflow should run.
```

. Select *Save*.

You can edit or delete existing rules and workflows from the same section.

== MCP Server Support

> == Interact with Your MuleSoft Environment using the MuleSoft MCP Server

Reviewer: Should this be a level three heading? Make sure it's title case.

The MuleSoft MCP Server is integrated within Anypoint Code Builder and provides built-in tools to extend MuleSoft Dev Agent’s capabilities.

> You can use these tools to generate API specifications, create and deploy integrations, manage governance rulesets, build Agent Fabric agent networks, work with DataWeave, and gain insights into how your applications and APIs perform—all directly from Anypoint Code Builder.

Reviewer: You'll want to make this sentence shorter or separate into two sentences because it's more than 32 words.

> The following MuleSoft MCP Server tools are available in Anypoint Code Builder and are also supported when you use the Anypoint Extension Pack in compatible IDEs such as VS Code, Cursor, and Windsurf:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These MuleSoft MCP Server tools are available in Anypoint Code Builder and are also supported when you use the Anypoint Extension Pack in compatible IDEs such as VS Code, Cursor, and Windsurf:
```

=== Agent Network Development

* `configure_agent_network_yaml` – Modify agent-network YAML configurations for Agent Fabric projects.
* `create_agent_network_project` – Create and scaffold agent-network projects.
* `deploy_agent_network` – Deploy an agent network to a runtime environment.
* `publish_agent_network_assets` – Publish agent network assets to Anypoint Exchange for reuse.

=== Application Development

* `create_and_manage_assets` – Create, update, and delete assets in Anypoint Exchange.
* `create_and_manage_metadata` – Define, attach, and update metadata for Mule flow components.

> * `create_MCP_server` – Create a MuleSoft MCP server using the MCP Connector in a Mule project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `create_MCP_server` – Use the MCP Connector in a Mule project to create a MuleSoft MCP server.
```

* `create_mule_project` – Create a Mule project structure in a given directory.

> * `generate_api_spec` – Generate, modify, or enhance an API specification using AI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `generate_api_spec` – Use AI to generate, modify, or enhance an API specification.
```

* `generate_mule_flow` – Generate or update Mule flows and integration logic from natural language prompts.
* `get_topics_agent_actions_metadata_instructions` – Retrieve metadata and instructions for enabling topics and agent actions from an OpenAPI spec.
* `mock_api_spec` – Mock an API specification to test endpoint functionality through a mocking service.
* `open_project` – Open or manage an existing API, Mule, or agent-network project.
* `run_local_mule_application` – Run a Mule application locally, handling build and local runtime setup.

> * `search_asset` – Search for assets in Anypoint Exchange using flexible filters and criteria.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `search_asset` – Search for assets in Anypoint Exchange by using flexible filters and criteria.
```

* `test_connection` – Validate connector configurations (such as HTTP or Salesforce connectors) in a Mule project.

> * `validate_project` – Validate the current project—such as an API spec or agent network project—before deployment or publishing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `validate_project` – Validate the current project, such as an API spec or agent network project, before deploying or publishing.
```

=== Connector Development

* `uc_create_connector_workflow` – Create a complete LinkWeave connector end-to-end with a guided workflow plan.
* `uc_generate_api_spec` – Generate an OpenAPI 3.0 spec from use cases and API documentation.
* `uc_generate_connector` – Generate a complete LinkWeave connector from an existing API spec.

=== DataWeave Development

* `dataweave_create_documentation` – Generate DataWeave documentation for functions based on descriptions, parameters, and examples.
* `dataweave_create_project` – Create a new DataWeave project and return the project location.
* `dataweave_create_sample_data` – Create DataWeave input sample data for a given transformation file.
* `dataweave_get_module_metadata` – Return functions, parameters, and types for a specific DataWeave module.
* `dataweave_get_project_metadata` – Return metadata for a DataWeave project, including modules, functions, and supported data formats.

> * `dataweave_open_project` – Open a DataWeave project from a given URL in the current or a new window.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `dataweave_open_project` – Open a DataWeave project from a given URL in the current window or a new window.
```

> * `dataweave_run_script_tool` – Run a DataWeave transformation with sample data to validate script output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `dataweave_run_script_tool` – Run a DataWeave transformation with sample data to validate the script output.
```

=== Application Management

* `create_and_manage_api_instances` – Create and configure API instances in Anypoint API Manager.
* `deploy_mule_application` – Deploy Mule applications to CloudHub 2.0 or Runtime Fabric with optional HA, security, and performance settings.
* `list_api_instances` – List API instances in an environment and optionally include applied and available policies.
* `list_applications` – List Mule applications in an environment and optionally include metrics and logs.
* `update_mule_application` – Update a Mule application deployment configuration, including runtime version, replicas, and scaling options.

=== Governance

* `add_governance_ruleset` – Add a governance ruleset from Anypoint Exchange to your project.
* `list_governance_rulesets` – List governance rulesets that apply to your project.
* `validate_api_against_ruleset` – Validate an API spec against governance rulesets and rules.

=== Policy Management

> * `get_flex_gateway_policy_example` – Retrieve Flex Gateway policy examples to help configure Rust-based custom policies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `get_flex_gateway_policy_example` – Retrieve Flex Gateway policy examples to configure Rust-based custom policies.
```

* `manage_api_instance_policy` – Apply or update policies on an API instance in API Manager.
* `manage_flex_gateway_policy_project` – Guide the LLM in creating, configuring, building, and publishing Flex Gateway custom policy projects.

=== Usage and Insights

* `get_platform_insights` – Get usage and operational insights for applications and APIs across your organization.
* `get_reuse_metrics` – Get reuse metrics for assets across your organization to understand adoption and reduce duplication.

For more information about these tools and their parameters, see:
xref:mulesoft-mcp-server::reference-mcp-tools.adoc[MuleSoft MCP Server Tool Reference].

== Add and Manage Custom MCP Servers

From the MuleSoft Dev Agent panel, you can add your own MCP server or manage connected MCP servers through the MCP Server settings.

=== Open MCP Server Settings

. Open the MuleSoft Dev Agent panel in Anypoint Code Builder.
. Select *Manage MCP Servers*.
+
NOTE: From this view, you can enable or disable MCP servers that have been installed. The MuleSoft MCP Server comes pre-installed with Dev Agent.

> . Select the gear icon to open full MCP Server settings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Select the gear icon to open the full MCP Server settings.
```

This opens the MCP Servers UI with three tabs:

* *Marketplace*
* *Remote Servers*
* *Installed*

> These views let you install new MCP servers, connect remote MCP servers, or manage existing ones.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With these views, you can install new MCP servers, connect to remote MCP servers, and manage existing MCP servers.
```

=== Add an MCP Server

> You can add a custom MCP server in three ways: installing from the Marketplace, adding a remote MCP server, or manually editing the configuration file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can add a custom MCP server by installing the server from the Marketplace, adding a remote MCP server, or manually editing the configuration file.
```

==== Install From Marketplace

. In MCP Server settings, select the *Marketplace* tab.
. Browse the available MCP servers or filter by category.
. Click *Install* to add the selected MCP server to your environment.
+

> NOTE: Marketplace servers include community-provided MCP servers. Not all servers are supported by Salesforce—install at your own risk.

Reviewer: I think the second sentence should be written without the dash.

==== Add a Remote MCP Server

. Select the *Remote Servers* tab.
. Enter a *Server Name* and a *Service URL* for the remote MCP server.
. Click *Add Server* to connect to the remote instance.
. (Optional) Select *Edit Configuration* to manually configure the MCP server by updating the `a4d_mcp_settings.json` file.

==== Manually Configure the JSON File

If needed, you can configure MCP servers directly by editing the `a4d_mcp_settings.json` file:

. From the *Remote Servers* tab, select *Edit Configuration*.
. Update fields such as server names, URLs, and additional settings.
. Save your changes to apply the configuration.

=== Manage Installed MCP Servers

Once an MCP server has been installed, you can manage it from the *Installed* tab.

=== Enable, Disable, or Restart Servers

> . Select the *Installed* tab.

Reviewer: Should these steps be in paragraph form instead?

. Toggle each MCP server on or off.
. To restart a server, select *Restart Server* from its configuration panel.

=== Manage Tools for an MCP Server

> Each MCP server provides a set of tools—actions that Dev Agent can perform.

Reviewer: Revise to omit the dash. Also, maybe add a sentence to introduce the steps.

. In the *Installed* tab, select a server to expand its details.
. View the list of available tools for that server.
. To auto-approve an individual tool, check the *Auto-approve* box next to that tool.
+
NOTE: Auto-approval for tools is available only if Auto-approve has been enabled in Dev Agent settings.
. To auto-approve all tools from a server, scroll to the bottom of the list and enable *Auto-approve all tools*.

=== Configure Request Timeout

> You can configure how long Dev Agent waits for a response from an MCP server:

Reviewer: Change to something like "Follow these steps to configure..."

. In the server details panel, locate *Request Timeout*.

> . Select a timeout value: 30 seconds, 1 minute, 5 minutes, 10 minutes, 30 minutes, or 1 hour.

Reviewer: I don't think the values need to be listed.

=== Delete an MCP Server

To remove an MCP server:

. Open the server's configuration panel from the *Installed* tab.
. Scroll to the bottom of the tools list.
. Select *Delete Server*.
. Confirm the deletion.

> Tool availability, behavior, and stability may vary depending on the MCP server version, configuration, and whether the server is community-provided or supported by Salesforce.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tool availability, behavior, and stability may vary depending on the MCP server version and configuration, as well as whether the server is community-provided or supported by Salesforce.
```

== Provide Dev Agent with Context

> You can improve the accuracy of MuleSoft Dev Agent’s outputs by providing additional context files or inputs.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can improve the accuracy of MuleSoft Dev Agent’s output by providing additional context files or inputs.  
```

Examples include requirement files (`requirements.txt`), configuration folders, logs, URLs, or terminal output.

To add context:

. In the MuleSoft Dev Agent panel, click the *Add Context* icon in the lower-left corner.

> . Select files or folders to attach, paste terminal input/output, or paste a URL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Select files or folders to attach, paste the input or output from terminal, or paste a URL.
```

. Confirm to add the context to your current task.

You can also add context directly from the prompt input box by typing `@`, which opens the same context selector.

These inputs are used as contextual references during generation.

== Add Commands

Commands provide quick shortcuts for interacting with MuleSoft Dev Agent.  
You can invoke any command by typing `/` in the prompt input box.

Dev Agent includes several built-in commands:

* `/newrule` — Create a new rule based on the current conversation.
* `/newchat` — Start a new chat that carries over context from your current task.
* `/reportbug` — Report an issue by creating a GitHub ticket with Agentforce Vibes formatting.

Workflows that you define also appear as commands under *Workflow Commands*.  

> You can trigger them the same way—by typing `/` followed by the workflow name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can trigger them the same way by typing `/` followed by the workflow name.
```

* *Edit all files*: Allow MuleSoft Dev Agent to edit any file on your computer.
* *Use MCP Servers*: Allow MuleSoft Dev Agent to use connected MCP servers.
* *Execute safe commands*: Allow MuleSoft Dev Agent to execute safe terminal commands.
* *Execute all commands*: Allow MuleSoft Dev Agent to execute any terminal command.
* *Use the browser*: Allow MuleSoft Dev Agent to launch and interact with websites in a browser.

== View Conversation History

MuleSoft Dev Agent allows you to return to tasks you have previously started and continue working from where you left off.

To open a recently started task:

. In the MuleSoft Dev Agent panel, locate the *Recent Tasks* section.
. Select the task you want to reopen.

If the task is not listed under Recent Tasks:

. Click *View All History*.
. Use the search bar to find a specific task, or browse your full history list.

You can sort tasks by:

* *Newest*
* *Oldest*
* *Most Tokens*
* Other available criteria

You can also filter tasks by:

* *Workspace*
* *Favorites*

To favorite a task, click the *Star* icon next to the task entry.

=== Delete History

You can remove past tasks in two ways:

> * *Delete specific tasks* – Select individual tasks and click *Delete Specific*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Delete specific tasks* – Deletes the specific tasks you select.
```

> * *Delete all history* – Select *Delete All History* to clear all tasks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Delete all history* – Clears all tasks.
```

== Example Prompts

Use these example prompts to guide MuleSoft Dev Agent in completing common tasks. Customize the values to match your project or environment.

=== Application Deployment and Projects

To deploy an app to CloudHub or Runtime Fabric:

Deploy this app.

To create an implementation project:

> Create a Mule project that creates an order in NetSuite every time an opportunity in Salesforce is updated to stage ‘Closed Won’.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a Mule project that creates an order in NetSuite every time an opportunity in Salesforce is updated to the ‘Closed Won’ stage.
```

To deploy an implementation application:

Deploy Mule application in current project. Deploy with high security, high availability, and performance optimized settings.

To modify an existing application:

Update this application so that it [business requirements].

=== Exchange Asset Management

To create an asset in Exchange:

I would like to create an asset of [this type] in Exchange with this [name].

To search for an asset in Exchange:

Find [asset name].

To search for an asset within a specific organization:

Find [asset name] in [organization name].

=== API Instances

To create an instance and secure it:

Create an instance for the [application_name] and apply the rate limiting policy to that instance.

=== Custom Metadata

> To set custom metadata using sample data:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To set custom metadata that uses sample data:
```
